GWEN IFILL: In just 29 minutes
today, China's
stock market plunged 7 percent,
and then was
shut down altogether for the
day. It's the
second time in just four days
the China markets
have crashed badly, sending
major ripples
around the world, including on
Wall Street,
where the Dow dropped nearly 400
points, and
continued a two-week slide.
Let's look at what's behind the
great fall
in China with David Wessel,
director of the
Hutchins Center on Fiscal and
Monetary Policy
at the Brookings Institution. He
is also a
contributing correspondent to
The Wall Street
Journal.
David, help us puzzle this out.
China's economy
or at least its markets are not
that big,
but the reverberations certainly
were.
DAVID WESSEL, The Wall Street
Journal: That's
right.
China's economy is pretty big.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
DAVID WESSEL: And I think the
one thing that's
going on here is that people are
saying, uh-oh,
the Chinese economy might be
slowing more
than we thought and the
government is having
a hard time stimulating it
again.
So, that's one thing. There's
worries about
that. But you're absolutely
right. China's
stock market is not very big.
And yet when
stock market has a bad day in
China, it seems,
Europe has a bad day and then we
have a bad
day.
GWEN IFILL: What's that
connection between
a 7 percent drop in China and a
400-point
drop here?
DAVID WESSEL: I think it's hard
to understand
in economics. It's easier to
understand on
psychology.
It's a kind of panic or a sense
that the world
economy is just not in as good
shape as we
thought and so everybody is
chasing everybody
else.
GWEN IFILL: And that is
something in which
this psychological panic is
always what drives
markets, not necessarily
anything that makes
any other kind of economic
sense.
DAVID WESSEL: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
But there is the fact that --
people have
had a lot of confidence that the
Chinese leadership
could fix what is wrong with
their economy
so it wouldn't have ripple
effects around
the world. I think that
confidence is being
shaken by how difficult it is
for them to
manage their stock market and
their currency.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's talk
about managing
the currency that was part of
the solution
here, which is to let the
currency fall. But
that seems to be making it
worse?
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
I think it was seen as a symptom
that the
Chinese leadership may be really
scared about
their economy. Why would they
want their currency
to fall? Well, the only reason
you would want
your currency to fall, if you
could control
it, is in order to get more
exports. Why would
you want to depend more on
exports if you're
a country that has a stated
policy of relying
less on exports and more on
consumer spending,
domestic spending?
They must be worried about
consumer spending
not being as strong as they had
thought.
GWEN IFILL: And then stopping
trading mid-trade,
that -- I remember when that
happened on Wall
Street here, and it sent
complete panic throughout
all the investors here.
DAVID WESSEL: I think the
Chinese are really
amateurs when it comes to
running markets.
GWEN IFILL: Ah.
DAVID WESSEL: They don't really
believe in
markets. They like stability,
they like control.
So we have circuit-breakers here
and if the
stock market falls some, we take
a pause in
trading, but in the U.S., stocks
have to fall
20 percent before we shut down
trading for
the day.
The Chinese shut down trading
after only 7
percent. And I think what they
put in as a
way to make people collect their
wits, cool
down a little bit, has, instead,
accelerated
panic. I wouldn't be at all
surprised if they
change the rules.
GWEN IFILL: Do you expect that
there will
be continued volatility there as
well as here?
DAVID WESSEL: Well, nobody
really knows what
the market is going to do, but
it sure looks
like we are going to have a lot
more volatility.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
DAVID WESSEL: At some point,
people may decide
that the U.S. stock market has
fallen enough.
After all, the U.S. economy
seems to be getting
better, that what happens in
China is not
going to have that devastating
effect on car
sales here or how many people
buy Apple phones
or what happens at -- how many
people shop
at Wal-Mart.
It may be that the U.S. stock
market starts
to rise if people think it's
gone far enough.
GWEN IFILL: But you have alluded
to the fact
that people are worried that is
not what is
happening with the Chinese
economy, that in
fact it may not be that
resilient.
DAVID WESSEL: Right. That's the
fear.
People have put a lot of faith
in the government's
ability to get growth going in
China. People
have this, what I think,
illusion that there
are six people in China who
really have their
hand on every button. And what
we're learning
is, it's a very big economy and
they're not
that good at it.
So, people's confidence in their
leadership
has been shaken. If the
government can't get
the economy moving again, they
have a lot
of fundamental problems. They
may now show
through.
GWEN IFILL: Is there a way to
draw a loop
between what's happening in
China's economy,
what is happening here, and what
is happening
with the depressed price of oil
around the
world?
DAVID WESSEL: Yes. Yes, there
is.
I think oil prices are down for
two reasons.
One is, there is a lot of
supply. There is
a lot of supply because the U.S.
now produces
a lot of oil and there is a lot
of supply
because the Saudis seem to want
to produce
a lot of oil, maybe to punish
the Iranians
and the Russians.
But there is also a concern that
there is
a lack of demand of oil. And so
when commodity
prices fall, it's good if you
happen to be
a consumer, but it's sometimes
seen as symptom
of a weakening economy. So I
think that exacerbates
the feel that maybe China is
slowing down.
That means it will be buying
less from Africa
and Latin America. That means
Procter & Gamble
and Coca-Cola will sell less in
Latin America
and Africa. And so it is
definitely related.
GWEN IFILL: Fascinating.
David Wessel, thanks, as usual,
for clearing
it all up for us.
DAVID WESSEL: You're welcome.